Isaac Abraham
Forewords by Phillip Carter and Tomas Petricek




           MANNING
       The mental model of the development process in F#


                                                                               Domain
               Start here       Developer
                                                                               expert



                                                   Collaboration


                                                                               Iterative
                                                     Domain                    process
                                                                                                     Script
               General                              exploration
               coding loop
                                                    Outcomes

                                                                      Core application domain



                                    Business                               Business
                                      rules                                  logic



                                Encoded                                                Conditional
                                                                                       logic and
                                                                                       mapping
                                                      Define       Contracts
         SQL                                          types

                                Validation



                                Read and               Inputs                Create
etc.    JSON                    write data                                 functions


                                                                           Outputs
                                                Finished modelling
          In-
        memory
                                                                                       Fix errors

                                                     Compile-
                                                       time
                                                      checks



                                               Everything compiles!
                                                                           Testing/running your app
                                                                           Minimal/no debugging


          Web
                                                                                                     Android
        browser
                       Compile to
                       javascript                                                      xamarin
                                        Web          Console             Mobile


         Web
                                                                                                      iOS
        server
                                                        etc
                        Praise for the previous edition


Leads you on a journey of F# that's both pragmatic and relevant.

                                         —From the Foreword by Dustin Campbell, Microsoft

Does a great job of explaining F# clearly and effectively.

                                        —From the Foreword by Tomas Petricek, fsharpWorks

A wonderful introduction to the subtleties of the F# language. You'll be productive within minutes!

                                                                    —Jason Hales, Digital Tier

Combines excellent explanations, real-world use cases, and a steady supply of questions and
exercises to make sure you really understand what is being taught. Highly recommended!

                                                                —Joel Clermont, GrowthPoint

Puts the FUN into functional programming with F#.

                                                               —Stephen Byrne, Action Point

This is an excellent book, and I'd strongly recommend it to any C# developer interested in learning
a functional language.

                                                                   —Anne Epstein, Headspring

This is a great resource to learn F#.

                                                        —Bruno Sonnino, Revolution Software

The power of F# unlocked in one book!

                                                                         —Dane Balia, Hetzner
       F# in Action
               A REVISED EDITION OF GET PROGRAMMING WITH F#



                                    ISAAC ABRAHAM
FOREWORDS BY PHILLIP CARTER AND TOMAS PETRICEK




                                         MANNING
                                         SHELTER ISLAND
For online information and ordering of this and other Manning books, please visit
www.manning.com. The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in quantity.
For more information, please contact
      Special Sales Department
      Manning Publications Co.
      20 Baldwin Road
      PO Box 761
      Shelter Island, NY 11964
      Email: orders@manning.com


©2024 by Manning Publications Co. All rights reserved.


No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without prior written
permission of the publisher.


Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are
claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in the book, and Manning Publications
was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.


Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, it is Manning’s policy to have
the books we publish printed on acid-free paper, and we exert our best efforts to that end.
Recognizing also our responsibility to conserve the resources of our planet, Manning books
are printed on paper that is at least 15 percent recycled and processed without the use of
elemental chlorine.


The authors and publisher have made every effort to ensure that the information in this book
was correct at press time. The authors and publisher do not assume and hereby disclaim any
liability to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether
such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident, or any other cause, or from any usage
of the information herein.


      Manning Publications Co.               Development editor:     Dustin Archibald
      20 Baldwin Road                           Technical editor:    Michael Ciccotti
      PO Box 761                                  Review editors:    Adriana Sabo and Dunja Nikitović
      Shelter Island, NY 11964                 Production editor:    Kathy Rossland
                                                     Copy editor:    Alisa Larson
                                                     Proofreader:    Jason Everett
                                           Technical proofreader:    Sudipta Mukherjee
                                                      Typesetter:    Dennis Dalinnik
                                                  Cover designer:    Marija Tudor



ISBN: 9781633439535
Printed in the United States of America
                                         brief contents
 1   ■   Introducing F# 1
 2   ■   Hands on with F# 10
 3   ■   F# Syntax Basics    26
 4   ■   F# Fundamentals      46
 5   ■   Shaping data   64
 6   ■   Functions and modules       82
 7   ■   Working with collections        101
 8   ■   Patterns and unions       124
 9   ■   Building rich domains      145
10   ■   Working effectively with data         166
11   ■   F# Interop   185
12   ■   Asynchronous programming 205
13   ■   Web programming 222
14   ■   Testing F# code     249
15   ■   Pure functional programming            265
16   ■   Where next? 287




                        v
                                                                  contents
      foreword xiii
      preface xvi
      acknowledgments xviii
      about this book xix
      about the author xxii
      about the cover illustration   xxiii


1   Introducing F#
     1.1    What is F#? 1
                            1

     1.2    Why F#? 2
     1.3    When F#? 3
     1.4    How will this book teach me F#?               4
     1.5    How does F# work? 5
                Collaborative exploration 5 Type-driven development 5
                                                     ■



                Trusting the compiler 7 An opinionated language 7
                                                 ■



                Data and functions 7 Separation of business logic and
                                             ■



                external systems 8 Varied targets 8
                                       ■




2   Hands on with F#
     2.1
                                10
            Writing code the F# way                  10
                What, not how 11 Composability 11 Data and
                                        ■                     ■



                behavior 12 Working with a smarter compiler 13
                                ■




                                       vi
                                   CONTENTS                                                                         vii


     2.2   F# and .NET 15
     2.3   Creating your first F# program                                   16
             Installing F#         16   ■
                                                The .NET CLI                 16    ■
                                                                                           Hello World in F#   17
     2.4   Getting Started with Visual Studio Code                                            18
             The Ionide extension                18   ■
                                                              Exploring F# with VS Code                   18
             Writing your first F#               19
     2.5   REPL and scripts                 20
             The F# REPL 20 Trying out FSI 21 Moving to interactive
                                            ■                                          ■



             scripts 22 State in the REPL 23 Creating your first
                           ■                                                  ■



             function 23
     2.6   Development flows 24
     2.7   Where scripts and the REPL fit in                                      24


3   F# Syntax Basics
     3.1   F# syntax basics
                             26
                                        26
             Characteristics of F# syntax                     27   ■
                                                                           The let keyword           29
             Scoping 30
     3.2   Type inference               35
             Benefits of type inference 35 Type inference basics 36
                                                               ■



             Inferring generics 39 Diagnosing unexpected type inference
                                                 ■



             behavior 41 Limitations of type inference 43 Criticisms of
                               ■                                                                 ■



             type inference 43
     3.3   Exercise answers              44


4   F# Fundamentals
     4.1   Expressions
                               46
                               46
             Purity and side effects 47 Difficulties with statements
                                                          ■
                                                                                                          47
             Expressions to the rescue 49 Expressions in F# 51 ■



             Composability 52 Unit 53 Ignore 55
                                            ■                      ■




     4.2   Immutable data               56
             The problem with mutability 56 Modeling with mutable      ■



             and immutable data 58 Optimizing and opinionated
                                                      ■



             languages 59 Other benefits of immutable data 62
                                   ■




     4.3   Exercise Answers                 62


5   Shaping data
     5.1
                      64
           Composing types in F#                          64
             Data and functions in F#                     65
viii                                           CONTENTS


            5.2   Tuples    65
                    Tuple basics 66                    ■
                                                           More on tuples                     66   ■
                                                                                                       Costs and benefits
                    of tuples 69
            5.3   Records     70
                    Defining, creating, and consuming records                                              70    ■
                                                                                                                         More on
                    records 73 Records and .NET 76
                                   ■




            5.4   Anonymous records                                 78
                    Anonymous record tricks                          79
            5.5   Tuples or records 80
            5.6   Exercise answers 81


       6   Functions and modules
            6.1   Functions      82
                                                           82

                    The truth behind F# functions 83 Partially applying functions         ■
                                                                                                                                            85
                    Pipelines 85 Using records and tuples with functions 88
                                           ■



                    Tupled functions 89 Comparing functions and methods 89
                                                                ■




            6.2   Organizing code                          90
                    Namespaces 90 Modules 92 Moving from script to
                                                       ■                              ■



                    application: A step-by-step exercise 93 Referencing programs               ■



                    from scripts 96 Best practices for modules and namespaces 97
                                                   ■



                    Tips and tricks 98
            6.3   Answers to exercises                              98


       7   Working with collections
            7.1   Higher-order functions 101
                                                                101

            7.2   Functional collection pipelines                                             103
                    Imperative and declarative pipelines 104 Debugging                                 ■



                    pipelines 106 Understanding the List module 107
                                               ■



                    Common List functions 110 Ranges, slices, and indexing■
                                                                                                                                      111
            7.3   Other collection types                              111
                    Arrays 112 Sequences 113 ResizeArray 113
                                       ■                                          ■



                    Dictionary 113 Map 114 Set 115 More on
                                                       ■                      ■                            ■



                    Sequences 115 Comprehensions 116 Comparing the
                                                   ■                                                   ■



                    different collection types 117
            7.4   Aggregations             117
                    Imperative loops 119                        ■
                                                                     Functional folds                      119       ■
                                                                                                                         Simulating
                    Sequences 121
            7.5   Answers to exercises                              122
                                      CONTENTS                                                               ix



8    Patterns and unions
      8.1
                                      124
            Introducing pattern matching                                    124
              Exhaustive matching 125 Tuple matching 126      ■



              Simplifying pattern matches: A worked example 127
              Record matching 128 Type inference 129
                                                  ■



              When guards 129
      8.2   More advanced pattern matching                                       130
              Recursive matching 130 Nested or conditions 132
                                                          ■



              Binding symbols 132 Collection matching 132
                                                 ■



              Match vs. if/then 133
      8.3   Discriminated unions                      134
              Basics of discriminated unions 135 Pattern matching 137        ■



              Exhaustive matching with discriminated unions 138
              Nested types with discriminated unions 139 Single-case                   ■



              discriminated unions 140
      8.4   The F# type system                   143
              ANDing types            143    ■
                                                 ORing types                 143   ■
                                                                                       ANDing values   143


9    Building rich domains
      9.1   Working with missing values
                                            145
                                                                           145
              The billion-dollar mistake: Working with nulls 146 Options                       ■



              are the answer 147 Option.map 148 Option.bind 150
                                             ■                                     ■



              Interop with .NET 151 Options and collections 153
                                                      ■




      9.2   Handling errors             153
              Results 153 Handling multiple errors 155 Strongly typed
                                  ■                                                        ■



              errors 156 Exceptions 158 When to safely leave options and
                          ■                                            ■



              results 159 When to use options, results, and exceptions 159
                              ■




      9.3   Computation expressions 160
      9.4   Domain modeling: A worked example                                          163


10   Working effectively with data
     10.1   Best practices            166
                                                                  166

              Data is data 167 Separation of data and functionality 168
                                         ■



              Don’t treat scripts as programs 169 Working with lists of      ■



              results 169
     10.2   Serialization of data                170
              Deserializing JSON to F# 170 Acceptable alternatives to
                                                                   ■



              DTOs 173 Serializing F# into JSON 174
                             ■
x                                     CONTENTS


         10.3   Type providers         175
                  Working with the JSON type provider 175 Working with external     ■



                  data sources 176 More data types from FSharp.Data 177
                                        ■



                  Best practices for type providers 178
         10.4   Data visualization 179
         10.5   Working with other data sources                             181
                  The CLIMutable attribute           181          ■
                                                                      Working with SQL 181
         10.6   Tooling options         182


    11   F# Interop
         11.1
                      185
                Working with other .NET code                            185
                  Consuming C# classes 185 Interfaces 188 Fluent
                                                         ■                                    ■



                  APIs 190 Tuples 191 Out parameters 191
                              ■                      ■



                  Object-based programming 191 F# wrappers 191    ■




         11.2   Exposing F# to C#           194
                  Core F# concepts 194 Tips and tricks
                                                 ■
                                                                                    195   ■
                                                                                                  Introducing
                  F# into existing codebases 195
         11.3   Consuming NuGet packages                              197
                  Working with NuGet package dependencies                               197       ■
                                                                                                      Working with
                  NuGet tools 198
         11.4   The Fable project: F# and JavaScript                                199
                  JavaScript to F#: A brief history 199                    ■
                                                                               Introducing Fable             201


    12   Asynchronous programming 205
         12.1   What is asynchronous programming? 206
                  Async and sync programming                     206   ■
                                                                            A brief history of async
                  on .NET 207
         12.2   Asynchronous support in F# 209
                  Tasks in .NET 209 Consuming Tasks 211 The task { }
                                             ■                                                    ■



                  block: F#’s async/await 213 Executing multiple Tasks in
                                                             ■



                  parallel 214 Benefits of Tasks’ computation expressions 215
                                  ■



                  The async block 216
         12.3   Final thoughts on asynchronous workloads                                              218
                  The importance of immutable data                     218      ■
                                                                                    The viral nature of
                  asynchronous workloads 219
                               CONTENTS                                                                       xi



13   Web programming
     13.1
                              222
            The web and functional programming 222
              Web programming on .NET and F#                       223         ■
                                                                                   The HTTP
              Context 224
     13.2   Server-side web development in F# 225
              Creating our first ASP.NET application 225 The HTTP                   ■



              Handler 227 Composing HTTP Handlers together 229
                               ■



              Composing multiple routes 231 Writing our own HTTP
                                                           ■



              Handlers 232 Reading inputs 233 Validation 234
                                   ■                                       ■




     13.3   Functional patterns in a web application                                    235
     13.4   Creating HTML views 237
              Creating views through code 237 The ViewEngine DSL
                                                               ■
                                                                                                        237
              Benefits of an F# DSL for HTML 239
     13.5   Full-stack F# apps with SAFE Stack 241
              Overview of SAFE Stack 241 Installing the SAFE Stack
                                                       ■



              template 243 The MVU pattern 245 Removing all
                              ■                                                ■



              ToDo items: A worked exercise 247


14   Testing F# code
     14.1
                          249
            Automated tests: The value proposition                                      249
              F#: Types over tests     250
     14.2   Basic unit testing in F# 253
              Tests as functions 253 Expecto 254 Plugging Expecto into
                                             ■                             ■



              our code 254 Advantages of Expecto 256
                              ■




     14.3   Making testable code 258
              Preferring pure functions where possible 258 Preferring smaller       ■



              functions 258 Unit testing small function hierarchies 258
                                   ■



              Integration testing higher-level composed functions 259 Pushing                       ■



              side effects to the boundaries of your code 259 Using higher-order    ■



              functions to replace side effects 259 Don’t worry about
                                                                   ■



              encapsulation 260
     14.4   Working with NUnit-style test frameworks                                     261
     14.5   Other forms of testing 262
              Performance testing      262       ■
                                                     Property-based testing                   262


15   Pure functional programming
     15.1   A functional architecture pattern
                                                      265
                                                                       266
              External and internal boundaries                 266     ■
                                                                               Structuring larger
              functional codebases 267
xii                                 CONTENTS


           15.2   Composing functions                         269
                    The object-oriented approach to composition 270 Higher-order                ■



                    functions 271 Dependency rejection 274 Procedural
                                    ■                                               ■



                    composition 275 What should you use and when? 276
                                            ■




           15.3   Working with low-level dependencies                           276
                    A worked example: Working with a logging function 276
                    Flipping dependencies with a bootstrapper 278 Pros and cons         ■



                    of the wireup pattern 281 Applying the dependency rejection
                                                               ■



                    pattern 281
           15.4   Working with effects                    282
                    What are effects in F# and .NET? 283 Common effects     ■



                    in F# 283 Map and Bind 284 Using Computation
                                ■                                       ■



                    Expressions to hide bind pipelines 285


      16   Where next?
           16.1
                          287
                  How do I start using F# in practice? 288
                    Data analysis 288 Hobby projects 288 Coding
                                                    ■                           ■



                    challenges 288 Before-and-after proof of concept 289
                                        ■



                    Operational scripts 289
           16.2   How do I introduce F# to my team? 289
           16.3   The F# community 290
                    Social media 290            ■
                                                        Conferences and user groups                 290
                    Open source 290
           16.4   Advanced F# language features                         291
                    Units of Measure 291 Active Patterns 291 Type
                                                          ■                                 ■



                    Extensions 293 Implicit Conversions 293 Statically
                                        ■                                               ■



                    Resolved Type Parameters 293 Metaprogramming 294■




                  index   297
                                                                  foreword
F# is what I call a “Yes, and . . .” language. In improvisational comedy, an improviser
accepts what has been said (“yes”) and expands on the line of thinking (“and . . .”).
The F# language design and its ecosystem, toolset, and community adopt a similar
philosophy to building software. F# is comfortable for developers from almost any
programming background (“yes”), and it adds functional programming idioms that
open up an entirely different programming ecosystem (“and . . .”).
    F# in Action exemplifies the “Yes, and . . ” concept thoroughly. From the very begin-
ning, the tone is clear: F# is a good fit for many different kinds of applications. You’ll
find no ivory towers here, demanding that you rethink everything you know about
software, rewrite all your code, and permanently try to jam the purest of functional
programming into every bit of your software development life. Instead, the idea that
F# is a functional programming language that can bring with it a different way of writ-
ing software is rightfully presented as secondary to the productivity gained from writ-
ing succinct code in conjunction with a rich ecosystem of libraries and tools.
    In this book, you’ll find one, if not the most practical, approach to learning the F#
language. You’ll be rooted in what the F# language community often refers to as “the
F# way,” a set of principles and language idioms that produce succinct, robust perfor-
mance, and uniform code. This last point is worth emphasizing: in modern software
development, uniformity matters. When developers search for ways to solve a problem
in F#, they are often greeted by similar-looking code (that uses similar features) for
similar problems. This principle is foundational to F# in Action throughout all of its
examples, whether it’s the simple data transformations you learn at first or full-stack
web application development toward the end.


                                       xiii
xiv                                      FOREWORD


          Personally, I am delighted at how often real-world tools and libraries are featured
      throughout F# in Action. For example, plotting data using Plotly.NET not only teaches
      you how to use F# for data analysis work but also how to use a powerful scientific plot-
      ting framework through the lens of the language. You’ll get exposed to interoperabil-
      ity between languages, how package management with F# and .NET works, how to use
      tools like F# Interactive and the multitude of IDEs for F#, testing frameworks, and
      more. This is the exemplification of what makes F# unique: it’s not just a language to
      learn for the sake of learning a language; it’s an enjoyable tool to be used together
      with a multitude of other tools.
          When I first met F# in Action author Isaac Abraham years ago, he was concerned
      about practical and sometimes even boring uses of F#. This remains true today, and
      that mentality comes out in this book. With F# in Action, you’ll find a ruthlessly practi-
      cal approach to learning not only F# but also how to write software for all kinds of dif-
      ferent domains effectively. So, what are you waiting for? It’s time to get programming
      with F#!
                                                                                —PHILLIP CARTER
                             Phillip Carter was formerly the product manager for F# Language and
                           Tools at Microsoft and currently explores how to improve software systems
                                                                              using modern AI tools.


      When people talk about the evolution of programming languages, they will typically
      talk about what language feature was added to which language version. Yet, what
      enables a language and its community to evolve in a new way and become successful is
      often not a language feature. Do not get me wrong. I appreciate all the recent lan-
      guage improvements that make F# more pleasant to use, like string interpolation. But
      what makes it worth writing a brand-new book about F# is something else.
          First, there is the move from the .NET Framework to the new cross-platform and
      open source .NET (formerly .NET Core). F# was always ahead of the curve. It ran on
      the cross-platform Mono platform in the era of proprietary .NET Framework, it was
      open-sourced as early as 2010, and it supported third-party code editors ranging from
      Emacs to Atom since its early days. Getting all the F# libraries and tooling to work on
      the new .NET was a painful task, but we are there now. Not only did this get F# first-
      class cross-platform support, but the entire .NET ecosystem has also adopted ways of
      working that we in the F# world always, perhaps secretly, knew were the right ones.
          Second, the F# community has become a fully recognized player in the F# ecosys-
      tem. Many core libraries and tools for F# have been developed and used by its enthusi-
      astic open source community since its early days. It took a surprisingly long time for
      everyone to accept that this is the right way of working. Perhaps we needed the almost
      10-year history of projects like FAKE, Ionide, F# Data, and Fable to show that the F#
      community as a whole can take responsibility for core F# components, even if individ-
      ual maintainers sometimes move on. Today, community-developed libraries and tools
                                   FOREWORD                                               xv


are the basis of much of F# development. Their longevity is ensured by the commu-
nity, the nonprofit F# Software Foundation, and commercial F# companies investing
time into the development of those core F# components.
    Third, the way of talking and thinking about F# has also changed in the last couple
of years. The cross-platform nature of .NET made F# attractive to a broader audience,
and functional programming is no longer an obscure academic idea but something
that most programming languages support in one way or another. Sure, it is still worth
talking about how to interoperate with .NET, how to best leverage functional ideas in
F#, and how the language supports techniques like functional domain modeling using
types. However, we can now focus on how to get things done rather than on academic
or ideological debates. F# is no longer something strange but rather a broadly
accepted language that anyone can become curious about, learn, and use in practice.
    It is remarkable that the move to cross-platform open source .NET, acceptance of
the community as a key ecosystem player, and the new thinking about F# and func-
tional programming all culminated at the same time. But I would even dare say that
F# has reached a new harmonious, stable point where it can thrive and develop. And
this new stable point in the history of F# also needs a new F# book.
    The book you are looking at is a perfect fit for the new harmonious era of F#. The
book is pragmatic and does not try to optimize for a reader with a special kind of back-
ground. If you are a programmer interested in F#, it gives you an excellent hands-on
guide for learning the language and how to best use it to solve a wide range of prob-
lems. The book embraces the new .NET ecosystem, including the command line–ori-
ented approach to many tasks. It also embraces a wide variety of community-led tools
and libraries that make F# so powerful, ranging from the Ionide plugin for Visual Stu-
dio Code and the Fantomas code formatter to the Fable F# to JavaScript compiler and
the SAFE Stack for full stack F# web programming.
    Writing a book for the new era of F# requires an author with an impossible combi-
nation of traits. They need to be someone who has been using F# for a long enough
time to have the right expertise and ability to explain the concepts in a clear, practical
way. But they also need to see F# from a new, fresh perspective that is quite different
from what many of us old-timers are used to! How can we get a book that is not biased
by the particular interests of its author? Isaac clearly has the necessary expertise. Say-
ing that he has been using F# for over a decade is not a marketing slogan. I know
because he came to my F# course in London in 2012! But more importantly, he has
also been helping F# to enter the new era by supporting the community, both as an
individual contributor through his successful consulting company and as someone
who has helped us find a new way of talking about the language and its ecosystem. In
other words, Isaac and this book are the perfect guides to take you to the new harmo-
nious era of F#!
                                                                        —TOMAS PETRICEK
                                          Assistant Professor at Charles University in Prague
                                                                   preface
When I wrote Get Programming With F# (GPWF) in the late 2010s, I wanted to create a
practical, pragmatic, and easy-to-understand guide to using F# for real-world applica-
tions. While the book achieved those goals and has received positive feedback, some
parts of it quickly aged due to circumstances outside of my control—in particular, due
to one factor: the release of .NET Core. When I started the book, .NET Core wasn’t
even a real thing. It was called DNX at the time and didn’t have a clearly publicized
vision of where it was going or even that it would in time replace the .NET Framework.
But today, .NET Core (or nowadays just called “.NET”) is both the present and future
of all .NET development; this presented certain challenges for GPWF:
    The book focused on the .NET Framework.
    The book focused on Windows development and tooling. F# is now a first-class
     cross-platform language with associated tooling.
    The book focused on C# developers since, at the time, this was where most F#
     developers originated from. Nowadays, I see developers coming from back-
     grounds such as JavaScript, Python, Scala, R, and PHP as well as those coming
     to programming for the first time.
Even worse, many of the libraries and frameworks that almost half of the book focused
on were either rendered outdated or completely obsolete by the advent of .NET Core.
   F# in Action is my answer to these challenges: a reimagined look at F# today, based
not only on a more modern, cross-platform approach to F# but also updated with
my recommendations on how best to learn and use F# based on working day in and



                                     xvi
                                   PREFACE                                         xvii


day out with a team of F# developers and engagements in the community for several
years now.
   Writing F# in Action was a different kind of challenge to GPWF. I originally imag-
ined it would be a relatively short effort to upgrade the content of GPWF to make it
.NET Core ready. But as I dug into it, I realized that it would be basically a complete
rewrite as it targeted a new audience with new exercises and aimed to avoid some of
the pitfalls of GPWF, especially the use of specific libraries and technologies.
                                        acknowledgments
I am grateful to all who have helped during the writing of this book. Moving to a new
country and home twice in the space of a year aren’t circumstances conducive to
focusing on writing a book, but the support received and patience shown by the team
at Manning helped me immensely.
    In particular, I’d like to thank my development editor Dustin Archibald, technical
proofreader Sudipta Mukherjee, and all members of the production team for their
support with F# in Action. Many thanks also to Phillip Carter and Tomas Petricek, who
authored the forewords to this book.
    Special thanks go to technical editor, Michael Ciccotti, who is a senior software
engineer at Divisions Maintenance Group. He has 15 years of experience building
software, with experience in a wide variety of programming languages, and enjoys the
clarity and simplicity of expression that F# enables.
     Thank you to all the reviewers—Abraham Hosch, Andrew MacDonald, Andy
Kirsch, Artur Tadrała, Bjorn Nordblom, Christian Leverenz, Dale S. Francis, Dan Sheikh,
Dmitry Dorogoy, Florian Verdonck, James Liu, Jason Down, Jean-Paul Malherbe,
Joel Kotarski, John Henry Galino, Jort Rodenburg, Karl van Heijster, Kent Spillner,
Kevin Orr, Kristinn Stefánsson, Markus Wolff, Milan Mulji, Pasquale Zirpoli, Rani
Sharim, Ryan Gregory, Satej Kumar Sahu, Stefan Turalski, Thomas Peklak, Tiklu
Ganguly, and Vincent Delcoigne. Your suggestions helped make this a better book.




                                     xviii
                                                about this book
The overall aims of this book are very similar to Get Programming with F#: to provide
you with the knowledge to understand the fundamentals of F#, to gain the confidence
to use it in practical settings, and, lastly, to gain a smattering of knowledge of the core
principles of functional programming.

Who should read this book
This book is applicable to software developers who already have some experience in
software application development. It is particularly applicable to software developers
with an interest in learning more about functional programming within the context of
a large, mature platform and ecosystem, as well as those who simply want to level up
their game when it comes to writing higher-quality applications that are succinct,
robust, and performant. Although the book focuses on .NET, readers do not need to
have experience using the .NET platform.

How this book is organized: A road map
This book has 16 chapters, roughly divided into two sections. The first half details F#
the language itself, looking at different language features and seeing how to solve dif-
ferent programming and modeling challenges using them:
    Chapter 1 is an overview of the what and why behind F#.
    Chapter 2 looks at the .NET toolchain as well as working with scripts.
    Chapter 3 examines the basic principles of core F# language syntax and type
      inference.


                                       xix
xx                                   ABOUT THIS BOOK


         Chapter 4 shows how F# makes it easy to write applications that take advantage
            of essential functional programming techniques such as expressions and immu-
            tability.
           Chapter 5 illustrates how to make use of two core types in F#: tuples and
            records.
           Chapter 6 goes deep into looking at functions in F# and how to organize appli-
            cations using modules and namespaces.
           Chapter 7 describes the different collection types commonly used in F#.
           Chapter 8 rounds off this section by covering the use of both pattern matching
            and discriminated unions.
     The second half of the book focuses on practical applications of F# within a variety of
     different use cases:
         Chapter 9 shows how to build practical domain models that utilize all the differ-
            ent types covered in the first section of the book.
           Chapter 10 looks at techniques around working with data, such as sourcing,
            wrangling, validating, and visualizing.
           Chapter 11 covers interoperability scenarios for F#, both on the .NET platform
            (typically with C#) and on the JavaScript ecosystem.
           Chapter 12 focuses on asynchronous programming and how to handle differ-
            ent use cases around concurrency and parallelism within F#.
           Chapter 13 looks at web programming in F#, both server side on .NET and
            using transpilers that compile F# into JavaScript, and how we can write full-stack
            applications entirely in F#.
           Chapter 14 discusses different techniques for automated testing on F#.
           Chapter 15 is a slightly deeper dive into functional programming techniques
            and covers examples of how to write applications that emphasize the use of
            pure functions wherever possible.
           Chapter 16 is the final chapter of the book and looks at where your F# journey
            might go next, with ideas on applications that you can write to further your F#
            knowledge.
     This book is intended to be read alongside a computer. I’m a firm believer in learning
     by doing. In the same way that you almost certainly can’t simply read a book cover to
     cover on how to, for example, drive a car and then pass your driving test the next day,
     you won’t learn F# just by reading this book alone. So, although the first half is
     designed to be read in a linear fashion, with the second half being slightly more pick
     and mix, I would strongly suggest that you manually type in all the examples as you go
     through them to maximize the chance that you will fully understand the concepts and
     techniques that are shown.
                              ABOUT THIS BOOK                                      xxi


About the code
This book contains many examples of source code both in numbered listings and in
line with normal text. In both cases, source code is formatted in a fixed-width font
like this to separate it from ordinary text. Sometimes code is also in bold to high-
light code that has changed from previous steps in the chapter, such as when a new
feature adds to an existing line of code.
    In many cases, the original source code has been reformatted; we’ve added line
breaks and reworked indentation to accommodate the available page space in the
book. In rare cases, even this was not enough, and listings include line-continuation
markers (➥). Additionally, comments in the source code have often been removed
from the listings when the code is described in the text. Code annotations accompany
many of the listings, highlighting important concepts.
    You can get executable snippets of code from the liveBook (online) version of this
book at https://livebook.manning.com/book/f-sharp-in-action. The complete code
for the examples in the book is available for download from the Manning website at
https://www.manning.com/books/f-sharp-in-action and from GitHub at https://github
.com/isaacabraham/fsharp-in-action.

liveBook discussion forum
Purchase of F# in Action includes free access to liveBook, Manning’s online reading
platform. Using liveBook’s exclusive discussion features, you can attach comments to
the book globally or to specific sections or paragraphs. It’s a snap to make notes for
yourself, ask and answer technical questions, and receive help from the author and
other users. To access the forum, go to https://livebook.manning.com/book/f-sharp-
in-action/discussion. You can also learn more about Manning's forums and the rules
of conduct at https://livebook.manning.com/discussion.
    Manning’s commitment to our readers is to provide a venue where a meaningful
dialogue between individual readers and between readers and the author can take
place. It is not a commitment to any specific amount of participation on the part of
the author, whose contribution to the forum remains voluntary (and unpaid). We sug-
gest you try asking the author some challenging questions lest his interest stray! The
forum and the archives of previous discussions will be accessible from the publisher’s
website as long as the book is in print.
                     about the author
ISAAC ABRAHAM is a .NET developer since .NET 1.0 and has an
interest in cloud computing and distributed data problems. He
is the founder of Compositional IT and is a Microsoft MVP.
Isaac specializes in consultancy, training, and development,
helping customers adopt high-quality, functional-first solutions
on the .NET platform.




              xxii
              about the cover illustration
The figure on the cover of F# in Action is “Insulaire de Wateeoo,” or “Wateeoo
Islander,” taken from a collection by Jacques Grasset de Saint-Sauveur, published in
1788. The illustration is finely drawn and colored by hand.
    In those days, it was easy to identify where people lived and what their trade or sta-
tion in life was just by their dress. Manning celebrates the inventiveness and initiative
of the computer business with book covers based on the rich diversity of regional cul-
ture centuries ago, brought back to life by pictures from collections such as this one.




                                      xxiii
                                                     Introducing F#



      This chapter covers
       Learning what F# is and isn’t
       Why you should be interested in using F#
       When is a good time to use F#
       Understanding what this book will and won’t
        teach you
       Understanding the mental model behind F#




          In this chapter, I’ll be taking you through the basics of F#, how it may differ from
          other languages you’re familiar with, and why you should learn it. We’ll explore
          some of its great features as well as its potential as a primary programming lan-
          guage in your toolbox. Let’s get started!

1.1       What is F#?
          F# is a general-purpose programming language that’s designed to build systems that are
          robust, succinct, and performant across Windows, Mac, and Linux. It has a light-
          weight syntax, yet a powerful type system and compiler. This makes it a compelling
          choice for writing applications, as it enables developers to rapidly model real-world
          systems in a way that does what they intend.



                                                1
2                                         CHAPTER 1    Introducing F#


          F# is an opinionated language with a set of characteristics that it is optimized toward.
      What do I mean by this? F# encourages us to write applications using a consistent set
      of simple constructs such as functions, data, and types in a very low-ceremony fashion
      compared to many other languages that come from a more classical object-oriented
      background. Although some of those languages have added in some capabilities to
      hide some of that complexity, in F#, this has been a core part of its design from day
      one. As an example, here’s some basic F# code that defines a function:
                               Defines a function with a       Performs a
                                 single input argument         calculation and      Creates a
                                                               assigns the result   record result
      let addTenThenDouble theNumber =                         to a symbol          and returns it
          let answer = (theNumber + 10) * 2                                         to the caller
          { Answer = answer; Date = System.DateTime.UtcNow }

      F# is fully type-safe but does away with a lot of ceremony that other languages often
      put in place, such as type annotations and full-blown classes, leading to a way of writ-
      ing code that allows you to quickly focus on directly solving the problem at hand.
          Because F# runs on the modern, lightweight, cross-platform .NET runtime, it has a
      large, mature ecosystem of free and commercial tools and libraries, ranging from web
      servers to database access, cloud, data and analytical libraries, actor frameworks, and
      more. This means that you won’t have to create entire platforms but can reuse exist-
      ing battle-tested components already out there, leaving you to focus on delivering
      business value. You can seamlessly interoperate with C# code, creating hybrid F#/C#
      solutions if required, so if you’re already using .NET, much of what you already know
      about the platform will continue to apply.

1.2   Why F#?
      There are many reasons why F# might be a great fit for you. Here are a few to whet
      your appetite!
          F# is rewarding and fun. People who use F# find it a rewarding and enjoyable lan-
      guage to quickly write applications in that simply lets you get stuff done, freeing you to
      focus on the business of writing your application while the language does its best to
      help you along the way and guide you to success. I’ve spoken with many people who
      said they were in a programming rut but gained a newfound enthusiasm for software
      development when they switched to F# because it freed them to focus on delivering
      business value to their customers. This also works for the hiring manager—happier
      developers generally lead to less turnover, lower costs, and better results.
          F# is highly productive. At its core, F# is a relatively simple language with a concise
      and easy-to-read syntax and a relatively consistent way of problem-solving. Yet, at the
      same time, it’s a safe language to use, with a powerful compiler and type system (more
      so than many popular programming languages) that can trap many classes of potential
      bugs as you type. It also runs on a performant, mature, popular platform (.NET) with a
      wide variety of time-saving packages. In my experience, people writing applications in
                                     1.3   When F#?                                          3


      F# do so more quickly than in other languages because it hits a sweet spot between
      simplicity, safety, and power.
          F# is also very flexible. You can use it in numerous scenarios, from simple scripts
      for data exploration and experimentation to full-blown cloud-enabled end-to-end
      microservices and web applications. There’s a very good chance that whatever you’re
      doing today, you can also do in F#. There’s also the possibility that F# will open the
      door to areas that you may not have considered before. For example, if you’re coming
      from a C# background, F# will show you how you can use .NET for more data-oriented
      and analytical tasks that perhaps previously you might have thought could only be
      done in SQL. For those of you coming from a Python background, you’ll see a lan-
      guage whose syntax is not a million miles away from what you already know yet is stati-
      cally typed and highly performant. And for those coming from a JavaScript background,
      you’ll appreciate how some of the functional patterns that are becoming popular in
      that language are first-class citizens here and that F# has a static type system and syn-
      tax that gets out of your way.
          Additionally, if you’re interested in learning some of the fundamentals of func-
      tional programming (FP), F# is a great way to do that; it has its roots in languages such
      as ML and OCaml. However, it’s what I would call a “light-touch” FP language: you’ll
      appreciate how it guides you toward writing simple, error-free code without needing
      to know any of the math and theory people often associate with FP. Importantly, it also
      provides you with enough escape hatches such that if you need to break out into pro-
      cedural or object-oriented programming, you can do it without much effort.

1.3   When F#?
      Since F# is a general-purpose programming language, the simplest answer to when
      you should use F# might be “Whatever you’re doing today in whatever programming
      language you’re working in, you can probably do it in F#.” Nonetheless, let’s look at a
      few different use cases of F# to give you an idea of what’s possible:
          Console applications—You can write basic console applications such as command-
           line tools in F#. It’ll happily read and write from the terminal and has libraries
           to make animated, colorful console applications with widgets such as tables,
           charts, and progress bars.
          Background workers—F# allows you to write background services or daemons,
           which don’t necessarily have any console inputs. Perhaps you need a process
           that runs on a virtual machine that reads data from a database and creates a
           report once a day or an application that sits in the background and monitors a
           folder for new files as they’re created to parse and process them. No problem!
          Desktop applications—F# has support for desktop applications with a number of
           technologies, whether they’re simpler database-driven applications or richer
           applications with sophisticated user interfaces using either Windows-specific or
           cross-platform libraries and frameworks.
4                                        CHAPTER 1   Introducing F#


          Cloud services—You can write and deploy applications designed for just about
             any cloud provider; whether it’s a more infrastructure-focused service or one of
             the platform services that the bigger players such as Azure, Amazon, or Google
             offer, there’s support for F#.
            Mobile applications—Through the Xamarin and upcoming MAUI projects, Mic-
             rosoft offers a full suite of frameworks and tools for developing mobile applica-
             tions for both Android and iOS without knowing Java, Objective-C, or Swift.
             Instead, applications can be written once in F# and simultaneously target both
             platforms.
            Web services—F# can write web services that are secure, reliable, highly scalable,
             and extremely performant through the ASP .NET Core framework. Not only
             are web applications a natural fit for F#’s stateless programming model, but F#
             also has several libraries that give a truly first-class F# experience on top of ASP
             .NET Core.
            Web applications—Want to write applications in the browser? F# has you covered
             here, too! Through the Fable framework, you can compile your F# directly into
             JavaScript and run applications in the browser directly. This is a real boon if
             your team is not filled with JavaScript experts and prefers the benefits that static
             typing brings, where you can get the best of both worlds: use popular JavaScript
             libraries and frameworks such as React while writing code safely in F#.
            Data exploration and analysis—F# has a solid data-analysis-and-scripts story, from
             consuming data from multiple sources to visualizing data through charts and
             tables.
            Data modeling—One of F#’s often overlooked features is its effectiveness in mod-
             eling domains. Not only does it have a type system that allows you to easily
             model the real world in a minimum amount of code, but it’s also readable
             code—the sort that you can legitimately sit down with a nontechnical user and
             explore a domain, evolving a model of the real world step by step, side by side.

1.4   How will this book teach me F#?
      This book is designed to teach software developers who already understand the funda-
      mentals of software development how to develop F# applications on the .NET plat-
      form. It won’t teach you everything about the F# language—it’s not a reference
      guide—but it will teach you the core of the language in a way that will give you the
      confidence to start creating applications and learning how to find out more about
      the language and ecosystem on your own.
          As part of the journey of describing F#, this book will also teach you the basics of
      FP. You won’t need to know anything about FP before buying this book, and you won’t
      leave it as an expert in F#. However, you will understand the core concepts and be
      able to apply them in the real world to build applications from simple console applica-
      tions to fully featured web applications.
                                  1.5 How does F# work?                                      5


1.5     How does F# work?
        This section tries to give you a feel for how development in F# looks and feels. It’s
        based not only on my own experiences of the language but also on those of many oth-
        ers who have used it extensively. Figure 1.1 shows you how I see some of the common
        features of what your development experience will look like.

1.5.1   Collaborative exploration
        One of the features of the F# development experience that might not be so familiar to
        you is that it contains a highly interactive “scripting” mode, where you can experiment
        with different ways of modeling code, try different ways of implementing solutions,
        and see how they work. Once you’re happy with the result, you can quickly migrate it
        into a full-blown application—whether a console application or a data-driven web API
        running on ASP .NET Core (the standard .NET web server).
             Another aspect is the collaborative element that F# brings. F#’s syntax is highly
        readable for nontechnical people, and combined with its type system, it is especially
        effective for domain modeling. This means that you can (and I have done, many
        times) sit alongside a customer and, starting from ground zero, try to build up a
        model of a real-world system and test it out with some arbitrary code. There’s no need
        for a console test runner or full-blown database— just some code and in-memory data.
        It’s a much more iterative process, where ideas can be tested and thrown away at low
        cost, and both you and the domain experts can start to build a common understand-
        ing of the system you’re trying to model.

1.5.2   Type-driven development
        F# is a type-safe statically typed programming language, which means that you formally
        declare the types of your system, and the compiler will enforce rules that you define
        about those types. F# makes it very, very easy—and therefore cheap—to create and use
        types, meaning that you generally can afford to be a little more specific in how you
        model your systems. Doing this means that your code can be used to encode more
        business rules and is clearer and easier to read than it might otherwise be. Doing this
        not only means that we can more easily support business rules about our types but also
        protects against accidentally mixing and matching incorrect types of data. Finally, it
        also helps from a readability point of view: for example, while both City and Country
        in an Address type might be strings, in F#, it wouldn’t be unusual to have “wrapper”
        types for both, each with their own invariant rules and constraints.
            So, although F# is totally happy with you not doing any of this stronger domain
        modeling, it also doesn’t impose much of a cost on doing so and thus encourages us
        to “do the right thing” up front.
6                                                 CHAPTER 1     Introducing F#



                                                                                          Domain
                         Start here       Developer
                                                                                          expert



                                                              Collaboration


                                                                                          Iterative
                                                                Domain                    process
                                                                                                               Script
                         General                               exploration
                         coding loop
                                                               Outcomes

                                                                                Core application domain



                                              Business                                Business
                                                rules                                   logic



                                          Encoded                                                Conditional
                                                                                                 logic and
                                                                                                 mapping
                                                                 Deﬁne        Contracts
                   SQL                                           types

                                          Validation



                                          Read and               Inputs                Create
       etc.       JSON                    write data                                 functions


                                                                                      Outputs
                                                          Finished modelling
                   In-
                 memory
                                                                                                 Fix errors

                                                                Compile-
                                                                  time
                                                                 checks



                                                         Everything compiles!
                                                                                     Testing/running your app
                                                                                     Minimal/no debugging


                   Web
                                                                                                               Android
                 browser
                                 Compile to
                                 javascript                                                      xamarin
                                                  Web           Console            Mobile


                   Web
                                                                                                                iOS
                  server
                                                                  etc




    Figure 1.1   The mental model of the development process in F#
                                   1.5 How does F# work?                                       7


1.5.3   Trusting the compiler
        Following from this, one of the things that F# encourages us to do is to trust the com-
        piler. In many statically typed programming languages, software developers see the
        compiler as their enemy—something that must be somehow overcome to run your
        program so that you can test whether it works. In F#, this relationship changes to one
        where the compiler becomes your partner, giving you guidance and help to write code
        that does the correct thing.
            Eventually, the developer trusts the compiler to prove business rules without feel-
        ing the need to run the application at all. While F#’s type system isn’t all-powerful, it
        has enough smart features so that you can often code for several hours at a time, mod-
        eling your systems, writing functions, mapping types from one shape to another, and
        following the trail of breadcrumbs that the compiler gives you to follow to get your
        code working correctly without ever once running your application. Generally, once
        your code compiles, the first time you run it after the coding session, you’ll find it
        works. So, you and your team will typically spend, as a proportion of your entire devel-
        opment flow, more time actually coding and less time “trying things out” in the app
        end to end.
            I know that this sounds unlikely, unbelievable even, but it’s true. This is based not
        only on my own experiences but also on working with and speaking to lots of different
        F# teams and solo developers. They all say the same thing: F# makes them more confi-
        dent developers because it helps them do the right thing.

1.5.4   An opinionated language
        F# is an opinionated language, and it optimizes for a specific way of writing applica-
        tions safely that leads to fewer bugs and quicker time to market. The language makes
        it easy to do the right thing the first time and, conversely, makes you pay a cost for
        doing the wrong thing.
            For example, imagine you’re writing a system that needs to export a report in
        either Excel, PDF, or web formats. In F#, the compiler will give you a warning or error
        if you forget to handle any of those cases; if you add a fourth report module in the
        future, the compiler will again instantly show you every place you’ll need to change
        your code to handle the new report.
            This kind of approach is shown throughout the language, meaning that you’ll
        have much more confidence when your code compiles that it actually works as you
        expect it to.

1.5.5   Data and functions
        Although F# is different from the majority of popular mainstream languages out
        there, it’s not hard to learn. It eliminates many concepts that you would need to know
        in the object-oriented world, such as inheritance and polymorphism. It replaces those
        with a simple idea: you have data that represents the state of your application and
        functions that act on that data. Each function knows how to transform some data of
8                                          CHAPTER 1   Introducing F#


        one type into another type, and you compose those transformations into pipelines. You
        repeat this pattern throughout your application until the very end of the request, at
        which point you’ll, for example, write out a file or return some JSON data to the caller
        of your web service.
            For example, you might have a validation function that can handle a customer pur-
        chase request, another function that can convert that request into an invoice, and
        another one that can email the invoice to the customer. In fact, this simplicity makes it
        a great choice for non-software developers, including (but not only) data analysts.

1.5.6   Separation of business logic and external systems
        Another thing you’ll notice with F# is that because of the features of the language, it
        encourages (but doesn’t force you) to maintain a separation between your domain
        logic and external dependencies such as databases or web services.
            Doing this has many benefits. To start, your code will generally be more easily test-
        able. If you want to create some unit tests for a specific portion of code, you’ll find
        that it’s more likely to already support testing or, if not, be easier to refactor out to do
        so. This also feeds into the exploratory scripting phase that I mentioned at the start of
        this section: using scripts is something that you might well carry on into the main
        development cycle of your application as a way to quickly call parts of the codebase in
        an ad hoc fashion. This is especially useful for parts of the system that are more diffi-
        cult to reach within your main application. People commonly use console test rigs or
        even unit testing libraries for this, but an interactive script is normally a much more
        effective and efficient tool.

1.5.7   Varied targets
        F# has a flexible and varied set of target devices and platforms that it can compile into.
        .NET itself supports Mac, Linux, and Windows platforms, as well as all the major cloud
        vendors, and can develop desktop app software or backend services. Alternatively, you
        can write web applications with F# that either focus on backend data-oriented web ser-
        vices using ASP .NET Core, or you can target the browser using the Fable project,
        which compiles F# directly into JavaScript, or Xamarin/MAUI, which compiles into
        iOS or Android.
            Regarding data access, a plethora of libraries are available to you, including those
        built into .NET, C# packages that you can seamlessly use in F#, or bespoke F# wrap-
        pers, designed to give the highest fidelity F# experience. So you’ll have ready-made
        access to SQL and JSON libraries, cloud platforms such as Microsoft Azure or Amazon
        Web Services (AWS), and much more.
            In some ways, F# gets the best of both worlds: you have a feature set that many
        other languages (including C#) have been playing catch-up to for a few years now, but
        at the same time, you’ll have access to a popular, mature, high-performance, and reli-
        able platform and ecosystem in .NET.
                                Summary                                             9


Summary
   F# is a robust, succinct, and performant general-purpose programming language.
   F# runs on top of .NET, a runtime that can target multiple operating systems
    and devices.
   F# can be used for a variety of application types, from console to web to cloud
    applications.
   F# has a lightweight and interactive scripting mode that is ideal for exploration.
   F#’s syntax is simple enough that nontechnical people can read it, making it a
    useful tool for collaboration.
   F# is highly productive, rewarding, and fun to use.
   F# makes it easy for you to do the right thing and, conversely, gives you guard-
    rails to stop writing code that is likely to fail.
   F# has a basic model of data and functions, which is simple to learn yet made
    powerful through composition.
                                              Hands on with F#



      This chapter covers
       Writing code the F# way
       F# and .NET
       Creating your first F# program
       Getting started with Visual Studio (VS) Code
       Configuring VS Code
       Working with the REPL and scripts




          F# may be different than other languages you’ve used, but it’s powerful and useful.
          In this chapter, we’ll get started coding and dive into what makes F# great.

2.1       Writing code the F# way
          Let’s start by considering some of the principles behind F# with a quick compare-
          and-contrast with typical so-called curly-brace languages such as Java and C#. It’s
          worth doing before we start diving into the code so that you’re mentally prepared
          for some of the differences you might observe when doing F#. In some ways, much
          of what you read in this section is similar to what I said in chapter 1, except this is a
          more code-focused examination.




                                                10
                                 2.1   Writing code the F# way                                      11



          How much of a functional programming language is F#?
          We’ll cover this in more detail later, but in a nutshell, F# encourages what I consider
          the two most important parts of functional programming (FP): expressions and immu-
          tability. It also has many other features that support flexible functions (such as com-
          position and currying), and numerous recently added features have made their way
          into many other languages, such as lambdas and pattern matching. However, it doesn’t
          support or enforce more hardcore FP features such as pure functions, type classes,
          or higher kinded types.


2.1.1   What, not how
        Imperative code can be thought of as the low-level “how”—how you want to imple-
        ment something—typically a set of lower-level instructions. Conversely, declarative
        code concentrates more on expressing the “what”—what you want to achieve and leav-
        ing the low-level details to another party—in this case, a compiler. Here’s an example
        of an imperative way of filtering out odd numbers from a list using both imperative
        code (I’m using C# syntax here) and the equivalent declarative variant (written in F#):

        IEnumerable<int> GetEvenNumbers(IEnumerable<int> numbers)
        {
            var output = new List<int>();
            foreach (var number in numbers) {
                if (number % 2 == 0)                                            Imperative
                    output.Add(number);
                                                                                code
            }
            return output;
        }

        let getEvenNumbers =                                      Declarative
            Seq.filter (fun number -> number % 2 = 0)             code

        Both samples do the same thing. However, while the declarative version is focused on
        stating what we want and leaving the compiler to work out the nitty gritty, the impera-
        tive version takes ownership of how we want to filter the numbers—by creating an
        intermediary list, iterating through each item one by one, etc.
            Of course, most languages have libraries to support a declarative model, such as
        LINQ in C#, Streams in Java, and so on. In F#, this is the de facto way of working and
        is much more pervasive than you might be used to. If you’re used to the imperative
        model of developing, this can feel a little like giving up control. However, once you’re
        used to it, it’s very difficult to go back!

2.1.2   Composability
        F# also emphasizes composition rather than inheritance to achieve reuse, with sup-
        port for this baked into the language. Functions are the main component of reuse
        rather than classes, so expect to write small functions that plug together to create
12                                       CHAPTER 2   Hands on with F#


        powerful abstractions. Individual functions are nearly always easier to understand
        and reason about than entire sets of methods coupled together through state in a
        class. As such, making changes to existing code is much easier to do with a greater
        degree of confidence.
            Here’s a simple example of how we might build behaviors into more powerful ones
        in C# and F#, trying to get all even numbers from a list and then square each. Again,
        in C#, I’ve deliberately kept things at the method level, but you should also consider
        the effort required when trying to compose more complex sorts of behaviors across
        classes and objects:

        IEnumerable<int> SquareNumbers(IEnumerable<int> numbers) {
            // implementation of square elided...
        }

        IEnumerable<int> GetEvenNumbersThenSquare(IEnumerable<int> numbers) {
            return SquareNumbers(GetEvenNumbers(numbers))
        }                                                          Composes two
                                                                              methods together
        let squareNumbers = Seq.map (fun x -> x * x)
        let getEvenNumbersThenSquare = getEvenNumbers >> squareNumbers

                                                         Composes two functions together in F#



          Where are the types?
          F# is a statically typed language, just like languages such as Java and C#. But it has
          an extremely powerful type inference engine, which means it has the succinctness
          close to dynamic languages such as Python, yet with the backing of a strong type sys-
          tem and compiler, so you get the best of both worlds. More on this later.


        I’m not going to explain what the >> symbol does yet. But if you look at the F# version
        of code, you can visually observe that we’re somehow plugging the getEvenNumbers
        and squareNumbers functions together. This mode of design is, again, very common—
        building small functions and bits of code that do a single thing well and then compos-
        ing them together into larger, more complex parts later.

2.1.3   Data and behavior
        Another key pattern you’ll commonly see in F# is a clear separation of data and behav-
        ior. If you’re coming from a language that uses object orientation (OO) as the key
        mechanism for organizing code, you’ll find this a little different. Instead of having
        classes that have both state and behaviors fused together, F# encourages you to design
        code with simple data types with modules of functions that act on those types.
            For example, in the OO world, in a retail web application, you might have a Basket
        class with methods such as AddItem, Clear, and Checkout on them plus the internal
        encapsulated state (what the items in the basket are, etc.). When you call methods on
                                 2.1   Writing code the F# way                                13


        them, they would perform some action and modify that internal private state. In the
        FP world, you’d have an immutable record that stores the current state of the basket
        (e.g., what the items in it are) and a module with stateless functions such as AddItem,
        Clear, and Checkout. Each function would do some action and then return an
        updated version of the basket. This generally leads to much simpler code that’s easier
        to write, understand, and test and is more flexible and simpler to maintain. Of course,
        you’ll learn exactly why that is in this book.

2.1.4   Working with a smarter compiler
        F# as a language inevitably changes how you write code. I think of myself as a lazy
        developer: I like having things done for me. F# helps a great deal in this regard, espe-
        cially for boilerplate activities that in other languages need more care to ensure you’ve
        done the right thing.
             Let’s take a simple example in which you’re a developer working on a small
        change to an existing application. Imagine you decide to add a new field to an exist-
        ing class; you find the class and add the new field to it. Your code compiles, and you
        carry on with your day. Unfortunately, while you can reference this new field else-
        where, you forgot to account for all the code paths that create objects of this type and,
        unfortunately, left a code path where this field is not initialized.
            Later, you run the application and receive a null reference exception somewhere
        further down the call stack. Or, perhaps you’re unlucky and don’t notice the bug
        because it’s in a particularly obscure branch of code. Instead, a few months later, your
        users hit that code path, crashing the application and forcing a costly new release.
            You could, of course, write unit tests to force this issue to the surface sooner.
        Unfortunately, developers often don’t write unit tests, particularly for seemingly
        innocuous changes such as this. After all, who has time to write unit tests like this
        when there’s real work to be done for our customers and deadlines to hit!
            Wouldn’t it be nice if the language itself could support us here to prevent this kind
        of situation from occurring? In the F# world, adding a new field will instantly stop
        your code compiling until you explicitly set the value of the new field at initialization
        time, everywhere. You can only deal with how that new field is being used after you’ve
        fixed all the assignments and usages. Nulls aren’t allowed for F# types either, so you
        can’t set it as such. Instead, F# has the notion of optional values, which force you to
        account for the possibility of missing values.
            The net result? You’ll spend slightly more time fixing compiler issues and evaluat-
        ing possible branches of code but a whole lot less time testing and fixing runtime
        issues. In this example, you don’t need to write any unit tests to guarantee consistency
        of the type, nor is there a risk of getting a null reference exception at run time—and
        you won’t need to debug it to prove that you won’t get one.
            You may feel an instinctive negative reaction to what I’ve just told you. After all,
        why would you want a compiler to get in the way of writing code and slow you down
        from running your application? Don’t worry; this is a normal reaction and part of the
14                                    CHAPTER 2   Hands on with F#


     learning curve in trusting the compiler to help us write correct code in a much richer
     way than we’re used to, which saves us a lot more time further down the road.
        As an example, imagine you’re a developer meeting a customer for a first discovery
     workshop. They’re looking for you to build an IT system that can manage their train
     stock and inventory, and the first question you want answered is “What is a train?”
     What information needs to be captured? What kind of carriages does a train have?
     After talking for a while with your customer, you end up with the following model. It
     captures things like the carriages that a train is made up of, including what class they
     are, what features each carriage has, and the stops that the train will make.

       Listing 2.1   A domain model of a train system

     open System                                           A train carriage can
                                                           have a number of           A carriage can
                                                           different features.        be either first or
     type Feature = Quiet | Wifi | Toilet
     type CarriageClass = First | Second                                              second class.

     Type CarriageKind =                     Carriages can be either for
         | Passenger of CarriageClass
                                             passengers or buffet carts.
         | Buffet of {| ColdFood : bool; HotFood : bool |}

     type CarriageNumber = CarriageNumber of int                         A carriage has a unique
                                                                         number on the train.
     type Carriage =
                                                    A carriage is
         {                                          composed of all
             Number : CarriageNumber                of these things.
             Kind : CarriageKind
             Features : Feature Set
             NumberOfSeats : int
         }

     type TrainId = TrainId of string                Each stop is a
     type Station = Station of string                station and a
     type Stop = Station * TimeOnly                  time of arrival.

     type Train =
                                                  A train has a unique ID, and a
         {                                        list of carriages. It always has
             Id : TrainId                         an origin and destination and
             Carriages : Carriage list            a list of stops in between. It
             Origin : Stop                        might also have a station
             Stops : Stop list                    where the driver changes.
             Destination : Stop
             DriverChange : Station option
         }

     Obviously, as this may be your first exposure to F#, some of the symbols, keywords,
     and concepts here may be unfamiliar to you. Nonetheless, hopefully, you can see
     how F#’s syntax is lightweight and easy on the eye compared to some other program-
     ming languages and how something like this could be read and understood by a
     domain expert.
